The relational DBMS we cover in this class is mostly geared for a category of applications, known as OLTP.
Another popular category is OLAP. Yes, we are introducing these two terms, for the first time, here!
Do some research on your own and summarize your understanding of these two types of systems. Write at least a page worth of text, 3-5 paragraphs. Your write-up should cover at least the following items:
•	Define OLTP & OLAP. Explain the application context and the type of data handled by each
•	Similarities and differences in the schema structure for the two systems
•	What aspects of relational model do/do not apply to OLAP

Sources: 
Define OLTP & OLAP
https://francois-encrenaz.net/what-is-a-dbms-a-rdbms-olap-and-oltp/


similarities and differences 
https://www.stitchdata.com/resources/oltp-vs-olap/



relational model

OLAP
-	Online analytical processing (OLAP) is a computer innovation term referring to frameworks zeroed in on dissecting information in particular databases.  These sorts of frameworks are portrayed for their logical abilities, tending to multi-dimensional or one measurement information, handling all the data. The standard uses of OLAP are “business intelligence, data writing and reporting, through data mining processes.”  These operations are characterized by a low degree of exchanges, managing filed and authentic data. These sort of data sets depend on READ tasks, totaling all accessible data. The primary part is an OLAP cube. A cube consolidating information, like facts and measurements. Those are coordinated as constructions: star pattern, snowflake diagram and reality heavenly body. The converging of the multitude of 3D squares makes a multidimensional information distribution center. 

OLTP
-	Online Transaction Processing (OLTP) is a data framework that focuses on transaction processing and managing operational data. This sort of framework is recognized by the enormous number of exchanges they support, making them the best for online applications. The principal use of this technique are databases, commercial, hospital applications etc. These frameworks assemble input data and store them in a database, in an enormous scope. A large portion of the present applications depend on this communication approach, with executions of concentrated or decentralized frameworks. The most common operations are insert, update, and delete. In these frameworks, information is often refreshed, requiring a lot of task support. One extraordinary trait of those information bases is the standardization of its information. This happens because information standardization gives a quicker and more viable way of performing data set composes. 


Similarities and Differences:
-	Both OLTP and OLAP use transactions as the source of its data and have similar purpose behind its usage. They both have very good data backups and greatly increase the productivity of businesses using these frameworks in their database systems. While OLTP is more of an operational system and when looking at OLAP, we see it more as an informational system. OLTP can handle large amounts of small transaction and very simple standard queries.  It’s a very quick process and preforms in mere milliseconds compared to OLAP that takes sometimes minutes and even hours depending on the size and amount of data that the system must process and report on. 

What aspects of relational model do/do not apply to OLAP:
-	

 
     Online analytical processing (OLAP) is a computer innovation term referring to frameworks zeroed in on dissecting information in particular databases. These sorts of frameworks are portrayed for their logical abilities, tending to multi-dimensional or one measurement information, handling all the data. The standard uses of OLAP are “business intelligence, data writing, and reporting, through data mining processes.”  These operations are characterized by a low degree of exchanges, managing filed and authentic data. These sorts of data sets depend on READ tasks, totaling all accessible data. The primary part is an OLAP cube. A cube consolidates information, like facts and measurements. Those are coordinated as constructions: star pattern, snowflake diagram, and reality heavenly body. The converging of the multitude of 3D squares makes a multidimensional information distribution center.
     Online Transaction Processing (OLTP) is a data framework that focuses on transaction processing and managing operational data. This sort of framework is recognized by the enormous number of exchanges they support, making them the best for online applications. The principal uses of this technique are databases, commercial, hospital applications, etc. These frameworks assemble input data and store them in a database, in an enormous scope. A large portion of the present applications depends on this communication approach, with executions of concentrated or decentralized frameworks. The most common operations are Insert, Update, and Delete. In these frameworks, information is often refreshed, requiring a lot of task support. One extraordinary trait of those information bases is the standardization of its information. This happens because information standardization gives a quicker and more viable way of performing data set composes.
     Both OLTP and OLAP use transactions as the source of their data and have a similar purpose behind their usage. They both have very good data backups and greatly increase the productivity of businesses using these frameworks in their database systems. While OLTP is more of an operational system and when looking at OLAP, we see it more as an informational system. OLTP can handle large amounts of small transactions and very simple standard queries. It’s a very quick process and performs in mere milliseconds compared to OLAP that takes sometimes minutes and even hours depending on the size and amount of data that the system must process and report on.
	
